At-home workout routine for men
Whether you’re a seasoned expert or new to strength training, working out at home is a great option when you can’t get to the gym or need a change of pace.

The at-home workouts below require a limited amount of equipment. Plus, some of the movements can be substituted for bodyweight exercises in which you use your body’s own weight as resistance.

These exercises can serve as a weeklong beginner routine or be cycled to provide several sessions per week for advanced trainees.

If your goal is weight loss, you can add a form of cardio, such as running or cycling, between sessions.

Equipment required: flat weight bench, appropriate adjustable dumbbells based on your level of experience

If you’re just starting out, you may want to visit a specialty store to get expert advice on selecting the right equipment. But if you know what you’re looking for, you can purchase adjustable dumbbells online.

Rest intervals: 60–90 seconds

Romanian dumbbell deadlift, from Day 1 workout below
Day 1: Legs, shoulders, and abs
Legs: dumbbell squats — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Shoulders: standing shoulder press — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Legs: dumbbell lunge — 2 sets of 8–10 reps per leg
Shoulders: dumbbell upright rows — 2 sets of 8–10 reps
Hamstrings: Romanian dumbbell deadlift — 2 sets of 6–8 reps
Shoulders: lateral raises — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Calves: seated calf raises — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Abs: crunches with legs elevated — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Day 2: Chest and back
Chest: dumbbell bench press or floor press — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Back: dumbbell bent-over rows — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Chest: dumbbell fly — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Back: one-arm dumbbell rows — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Chest: pushups — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Back/chest: dumbbell pullovers — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Day 3: Arms and abs
Biceps: alternating biceps curls — 3 sets of 8–10 reps per arm
Triceps: overhead triceps extensions — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Biceps: seated dumbbell curls — 2 sets of 10–12 reps per arm
Triceps: bench dips — 2 sets of 10–12 reps
Biceps: concentration curls — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Triceps: dumbbell kickbacks — 3 sets of 8–10 reps per arm
Abs: planks — 3 sets of 30-second holds
SUMMARY
This home workout routine includes all the exercises you need to make sizable muscle and strength gains with minimal equipment.

Beginner’s workout routine for men
Lateral raises (from “Day 1: Full body” workout below)
Starting out in the gym can seem intimidating, but with proper guidance, the process becomes more approachable — and even invigorating.

As a beginner, you can progress very quickly because almost any exercise promotes muscle and strength gains. Still, it’s important to avoid overexertion, which can lead to injuries or decreased performance.

This workout routine has you in the gym 3 days per week (such as Monday, Wednesday, and Friday), with full-body sessions completed each day. This allows you to get used to new movements, focus on proper form, and take time to recover.

You can add reps and sets as needed as you progress.

The beginner phase should last as long as you continue to improve. Some people may plateau at around 6 months, whereas others may continue to see results for more than a year.

Equipment required: fully equipped gym

Rest periods: 90–180 seconds for main movements, 60–90 seconds for accessories

Intensity: Select a weight that allows you to complete the prescribed reps while leaving about 2 solid reps in the tank.

Day 1: Full body
Legs: barbell back squats — 3 sets of 5 reps
Chest: flat barbell bench press — 3 set of 5 reps
Back: seated cable rows — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Shoulders: seated dumbbell shoulder press — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Triceps: cable rope triceps pushdowns — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Shoulders: lateral raises — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Calves: seated calf raises — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Abs: planks — 3 sets of 30-second holds
Day 2: Full body
Back/hamstrings: barbell or trap bar deadlifts — 3 sets of 5 reps
Back: pullups or lat pulldowns — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Chest: barbell or dumbbell incline press — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Shoulders: machine shoulder press — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Biceps: barbell or dumbbell biceps curls — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Shoulders: reverse machine fly — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Calves: standing calf raises — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Day 3: Full body
Legs: leg press — 3 sets of 5 reps
Back: T-bar rows — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Chest: machine or dumbbell chest fly — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Shoulders: one-arm dumbbell shoulder press — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Triceps: dumbbell or machine triceps extensions — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Shoulders: cable or dumbbell front raises — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Calves: seated calf raises — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Abs: decline crunches — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
SUMMARY
This 3-day beginner program provides the full-body stimulus you need to gain muscle while allowing adequate recovery between sessions.

Intermediate workout routine for men
Overhead press (from “Day 3: Upper body” workout below)
After working hard in the gym for several months, it’s time to step your training up a notch to keep your gains coming.

At this point, you should have good exercise technique and be able to handle more weight on the bar.

This 4-day-per-week intermediate program increases reps and sets to stimulate new muscle growth. When they become too easy, you can gradually add more weight or more reps/sets.

If you do it correctly, you can follow this routine for several years until you reach an advanced level. It may be helpful to switch up your exercises on occasion to keep yourself engaged and prevent burnout.

Remember that soreness is not always an indicator of muscle growth. Now that you have some training experience, you may not get sore after every workout.

Equipment required: fully equipped gym

Rest intervals: 90–180 seconds for main movements, 60–90 seconds for accessories

Intensity: Select a weight that allows you to complete the prescribed reps while leaving about 2 solid reps in the tank. To increase intensity, go to your limit on the last set.

Day 1: Upper body
Chest: flat barbell bench press — 4 sets of 6–8 reps
Back: bent-over barbell rows — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Shoulders: seated dumbbell press — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Chest/triceps: dips — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Back: pullups or lat pulldowns — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Triceps/chest: lying dumbbell triceps extensions — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Biceps: incline dumbbell curls — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Day 2: Lower body
Legs: barbell back squats — 4 sets of 6–8 reps
Legs: leg press — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Quadriceps: seated leg extensions — 3 sets of 10-12 reps
Quadriceps: dumbbell or barbell walking lunges — 3 sets of 10–12 reps (no videos)
Calves: calf press on leg press — 4 sets of 12–15 reps
Abs: decline crunches — 4 sets of 12–15 reps
Day 3: Upper body
Shoulders: overhead press — 4 sets of 6–8 reps
Chest: incline dumbbell bench press — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Back: one-arm cable rows — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Shoulders: cable lateral raises — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Rear deltoids/traps: face pulls — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Traps: dumbbell shrugs — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Triceps: seated overhead triceps extensions — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Biceps: machine preacher curls — 3 sets of 12–15 reps
Day 4: Lower body
Back/hamstrings: barbell deadlift — 4 sets of 6 reps
Glutes: barbell hip thrusts — 3 sets of 8-10 reps
Hamstrings: Romanian dumbbell deadlifts — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Hamstrings: lying leg curls — 3 sets of 10-12 reps
Calves: seated calf raises — 4 sets of 12–15 reps
Abs: leg raises on Roman chair — 4 sets of 12–15 reps
SUMMARY
This 4-day intermediate program adds additional sets and reps, as well as more complex exercises, to jump-start new muscle growth.

Advanced workout routine for men
Hanging leg raises (from “Legs B” workout below)
Additional volume (sets and reps) and intensity (weight on the bar) are essential for advanced gym-goers to keep gaining muscle. Keep in mind that you should not attempt this routine unless you’ve been training consistently for 2 or more years.

While the muscle gains won’t come as fast as they did when you were a beginner, there’s still room for significant progress at this stage.

This grueling workout routine has you in the gym 6 days per week with 1 rest day in between. It follows a pull-push-legs pattern, hitting each muscle group twice per week, with supersets incorporated for maximum hypertrophy (muscle growth).

Again, you can increase weight on the bar, as well as sets and reps, from week to week to ensure continued progress while following this program.

Equipment required: fully equipped gym

Rest periods: 90–180 seconds for main movements, 60–90 seconds for accessories

Intensity: Select a weight that allows you to complete the prescribed reps while leaving about 2 solid reps in the tank. To increase intensity, go to failure on the last set.

Supersets: Complete the initial set of the first movement immediately followed by the second movement. Repeat until all designated reps and sets are complete.

Pull A
Back/hamstrings: barbell deadlift — 5 sets of 5 reps
Back: pullups or lat pulldowns — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Back: T-bar rows or seated cable rows — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Rear deltoids/traps: face pulls — 4 sets of 12–15 reps
Biceps: hammer curls — 4 sets of 10-12 reps supersetted with dumbbell shrugs 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Biceps: standing cable curls — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Push A
Chest: flat barbell bench press — 5 set of 5 reps
Shoulders: seated dumbbell press — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Chest: incline dumbbell bench press — 3 sets of 10–12 reps
Triceps/shoulders: triceps pushdowns — 4 sets of 10–12 reps supersetted with lateral raises — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Chest: cable crossovers — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Legs A
Legs: barbell back squats — 5 sets of 5 reps
Hamstrings: Romanian dumbbell deadlifts — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Legs: leg press — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Hamstrings: lying leg curls — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Calves: seated calf raises — 4 sets of 12–15 reps
Abs: decline crunches — 4 sets of 12–15 reps
Pull B
Back: bent-over barbell rows — 3 sets of 6–8 reps
Back: pull-ups (weighted if needed) — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Back: one-arm rows — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Lower back: hyperextensions — 4 sets of 10–12 reps supersetted with machine preacher curls — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Traps: barbell shrugs — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Biceps: standing dumbbell curls — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Push B
Shoulders: overhead press — 5 sets of 5 reps
Chest: dumbbell bench press (incline or flat) — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Chest/triceps: dips (weighted if needed) — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Shoulders: single-arm cable lateral raises — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Chest: machine fly — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Triceps: overhead extensions with rope — 4 sets of 10–12 reps
Legs B
Legs: barbell front squats — 5 sets of 5 reps
Hamstrings: glute ham raises — 3 sets of 8–10 reps
Legs: walking dumbbell lunges — 3 sets of 10–12 reps per leg
Quadriceps: seated leg extensions — 4 sets of 10–12 reps supersetted with standing calf raises — 4 sets of 12–15 reps
Abs: hanging leg raises — 4 sets of 12–15 reps
SUMMARY
This advanced program is incredibly intense and follows a push-pull-legs pattern for 6 days per week. Attempt this program only if you have several years of training under your belt.


Considerations for lifters over 40
As you age, muscle and bone mass gradually decrease. Nonetheless, you can counteract this loss by following a resistance training program to stimulate muscle and bone growth (1Trusted Source, 2Trusted Source).

The exercise routines outlined above still apply to people ages 40 and older, though you may to replace some exercises with more joint-friendly options — especially if you have any preexisting injuries.

For example, you can do goblet squats instead of back squats or triceps pushdowns instead of dips.

Regardless of your age, it’s best to start with the beginner program and work your way up.

It’s also important not to work out too strenuously, because there’s an increased risk of injury as you age. You may likewise need to extend recovery times to 2 days between workouts instead of 1 day, because your body takes more time to recuperate (3Trusted Source).

While exercise presents some obstacles for those over 40, maintaining a proper resistance training program can provide endless benefits and keep you consistently in shape.

SUMMARY
Trainees over age 40 may have to adjust their workout routine to account for injuries or slower recovery times. While muscle and bone mass decline as you age, you can combat this with proper exercise.

Don’t forget nutrition
While working out in the gym provides the stimulus for muscle and strength gains, nutrition plays a major role in recovery and exercise optimization.

Thus, it’s important to ensure that your food intake is adequate to meet the demands of your training.

You can do this by ensuring sufficient calorie, protein, carb, and fat intake based on your training intensity and physique goals. You can use a calorie counter to calculate your needs.

In order to gain muscle, it’s best to be in a calorie surplus, or eat more than your body needs to sustain itself. A surplus of 10–20% over your baseline calorie needs should be sufficient to promote muscle gains (4Trusted Source).

If you’re trying to lose body fat instead, maintaining your baseline or adopting a slight calorie deficit is generally recommended (4Trusted Source).

Nutrient timing, which involves eating at specific times to yield results, may also be vital to maximize muscle gains. For example, many experts recommend eating a well-balanced meal or snack within 2 hours of a workout, ideally both before and after (5Trusted Source, 6Trusted Source).

If you want to ensure proper dietary intake or create an individualized plan to help you meet your goals, consider consulting a registered dietitian.

SUMMARY
Proper nutrition is vital to exercise because it provides your body with the necessary building blocks for gaining muscle and strength.

Tips
When starting a new strength training program, it’s important to take precautions to avoid getting injured or overexerting yourself.

First, you’ll want to accurately assess your level of experience as outlined above and select the appropriate workout program for you.

It’s always best to start with a program that may be slightly too easy rather than an advanced program that is too difficult.

The workout routines above are broken down into specific muscle groups for each session to provide enough stimulus to achieve results without overtaxing your body.

What is your goal?
Depending on your individual goal, you may want to consider adjusting your reps and sets.

For instance, if strength is your goal (your power against resistance), the National Sports and Conditioning Association recommends 3 or more sets of up to 6 reps. You should lift heavier loads if strength is your goal (7, 8).

If hypertrophy, or an increase in muscle size and definition, is your goal, focus on sets of 6–12 reps with 1 minute of rest in between. You should lift about 65–85% of your 1-rep maximum for hypertrophy (9).

If muscular endurance is your goal, you’ll want to focus on lighter weight and higher reps (8).

Was this helpful?

In addition, performing a proper warmup is key to avoiding injury because it primes your muscles and cardiovascular system for the exercises to come.

Wear comfortable, close-fitting clothing that makes it easy to move, along with sneakers or other appropriate footwear.

If you’re increasing the weight you’re lifting or are unsure about a movement, it’s a good idea to have a spotter keep a close eye on the weight while you move it.

Lastly, allowing sufficient recovery time between workouts is another factor that will greatly reduce your risk of injury.

SUMMARY
To avoid getting injured or overexerting yourself, it’s important to choose an appropriate workout routine for your level of experience, perform a proper warmup before exercising, and allow enough recovery time between workout sessions.

The bottom line
Whether you’re a new or seasoned gym-goer, workout routines catered to your experience level can help you progress toward your muscle and strength goals.

Over time, you may find that your body responds better to certain movements than to others and choose to adapt your training accordingly.

A proper exercise regimen and good nutrition habits are the first steps to getting in the best shape of your life, no matter your level of experience.

If you have an underlying health condition, it’s always best to check with a healthcare professional before starting any exercise program.